It makes it useful for me.
I will say this with the machine running.
I promise you that we'll go over your stuff.
It's about a year before.
I have a year to read the book.
I hope it'll certainly be before that.
I will.
I'll want to go over the stuff, and certainly if you want to change a quote.
I'd like to say, for accuracy's sake, I have to... It's fine with me, too.
You'll probably have to try the spellings of these names of people and all sorts of strings.
The biggest pain in the ass is transcribing it.
Sure.
But it is good to have it accurate.
Tell me a little bit about the Mulholland collection.
Is there a catalog for that, by the way?
No, there's not a printed catalog.
We've been working on cataloging it since we've done it.
Well, John Mulholland was this New York-based magician and writer, teacher at Horace Mann, who started collecting as a boy.
I think the first purchases he made were about 1913.
And he knew the major figures of his day.
Howard Thurston, the great magician of his day, was particularly friendly with him, as was Houdini.
I mean, a lot of the treasures in the Mulholland Library came from Houdini personally.
Houdini clearly liked Mulholland a great deal.
And at that time, Houdini was the most active collector in this field.
So this collection was built for a long time by Mulholland, who eventually became the editor of what was the best journal in magic.
It was called The Sphinx.
And for a long, long time, Mulholland was the editor of it.
And he wrote articles on the history of magic, also published books on the history of magic, some of which are, you know, around and still quite good.
But where familiar spirits is a wonderful account of spirit wrapping and fraudulent mediums and quicker than the eye.
I mean, he was very good at this.
And this collection built and built.
And because of his position as the editor of the Sphinx, he was receiving all of the contemporary books of the day, usually with incredibly elaborate inscriptions.
And many of the things in his library had wonderful provenance.
And in 1966, he brought this over to the Players Club.
He was made curator of it.
He'd been a member of the Players for years.
And, you know, in Edward Booth's home on Ramsey Park.
And so it became part of this famous Walter Hampton Theatre Collection.
And by whatever means necessary, Mulholland died in the 70s.
How do you mean by that?
I was going to say, by whatever means they were allowed to do this eventually.
The sentence was, by whatever means necessary, Mulholland died in 1970.
I said, what?
This is the difference in speaking and writing.
I mean, I'm clearly jumping all over.
You're not paying attention to what you said.
Well, there's your mistake.
I don't pay attention to that.
Mulholland died and by what means
I'm not exactly sure the Players Club eventually decided that they were going to sell this collection.
You know, I'm not claiming that they couldn't sell it.
I am claiming, however, that Mulholland thought the collection was there for life.
I will say that, because I have a tape recording where Mulholland says that.
I'm addressing this in my book.
Well, I don't know the answer.
And like I say, I'm not pointing fingers.
Well, I'll ask them.
Because I don't know.
Well, it's pretty simple.
Yeah, go ask the Players Club and ask them.
Yeah, that's an interesting question.
So Mulholland certainly thought this was set for life there, but...
By whatever means, they, you know, the players decided, they tried to sell it privately for quite a while, and they were unable to do that, and then eventually decided to put it up at auction at Swan.
I had been called in by Swan as a consultant on the sale, and was helping them prepare it, because I knew the collection well.
I mean, I've been there to do research.
It must have really upset you to see this thing.
Oh, sure.
I mean, it was a great collection.
I mean, there's certain collections that you don't mind seeing in BookerNet.
I mean, if they're books.
That's right.
But this was one of the most famous magic collections in the world.
Anyway, one day we got a call from an anonymous benefactor.
Oh, it's a wonderful story.
Who suddenly said, you know, he'd very much like to talk to someone about keeping his collection together.
I was already living in L.A.
I just went back to L.A.
and talked to him.
Anonymous?
Yeah.
Which is interesting, too.
Anyway, we met five or six times.
You met the anonymous benefactor?
I met the anonymous benefactor, and eventually he decided that he would like to buy it.
I mean, what happened is,
He seemed very interested, but he didn't make any commitment.
I called him up and I said, look, we're going to press in 48 hours on the first part of the cell.
It was an enormous caution.
We would have had to do it in at least three cells.
So they did have a catalog printed?
We were about ready.
We never had a catalog printed.
I mean, we were two days away from having it printed.
We had slips.
It would be a nice collectible.
Yeah, we had slips.
And we were just about ready to do that.
And I called him up and I said, now is the time.
We had had an offer from Europe and we didn't really want to do that.
We didn't know what would happen to it in Europe, whether it would be broken up or kept together, it would be out of the country.
And he decided that he would like to do it.
We met one more time.
And then he said he would do it if I would stay on and be curator.
And I mean, this was like manna from heaven.
I mean, I had never even considered it.
I mean, it really was amazing.
I wanted to make sure that my stipulation was that I could still continue to perform and write, and he said that was absolutely no problem for him at all.
And so suddenly, you know, we got this collection.
Does the benefactor continue to be anonymous?
I mean, I don't read.
You can't tell me who he is.
Right.
So the collection went out to L.A., and, you know, in the early days, I mean, I was there alone.
I unpacked every book myself and put it up in this space, and then
You know, and since then we've had, you know, to the point now where I have three people working for me.
That's great.
And, you know, and we're active and collecting.
Well, now, who pays the three people?
You?
No.
The benefactor.
Well.
You should tell everybody.
You should ask the benefactor if they'd like to be identified on this.
That's a nice story.
Yeah, it is a nice story.
But I'm, I'll ask him.
I doubt it.
I didn't matter to him that I went to L.A.
He didn't insist that it stayed in New York.
No, he wanted to go to Ellen.
He wanted to go to Ellen.
And it probably belongs in that way, actually.
I don't know.
I mean, that's very hard to know.
I mean, one never knows the fate of such things, you know.
But all I know is that the last five years have been fascinating.
I mean, it came at a time in my life when this was a wonderful thing for me to be doing.
This is a good story.
I don't know as I've read it.
Has this been published, the details?
I don't think so.
I mean, there was a press release that Swan sent out about a white knight coming in at the last minute and buying the collection.
What happens to Swan?
Do they still get a piece?
Well, I'm sure they got a percentage to sell it.
They were the sellers.
They were the agents, right.
They usually have 10% added.
I don't know.
Well, did the players play hardball on this?
What do you mean by hardball?
Well, they can sign the thing for options.
Well, they obviously agreed, I mean, to do it.
But, I mean, did they, whatever they were hoping to get, did they get what they were hoping to get?
I don't know, again, I don't know the answer to that, because you have to look at my position then as opposed to my position now.
I was brought in as a consultant for George, you know, for George Lowry.
We got along fine.
But I certainly didn't establish the price.
Swan's graduate.
Yeah, Swan brought me in, right.
I didn't establish the price.
I didn't.
have anything to do with the sale.
Well, I suppose I had a lot to do with the sale in the sense that I excited the benefactor about the collection.
He, I'll tell you this, he was never a collector before.
Well, this is what's great, right?
Why didn't he buy it for himself?
Well, he did buy it for himself, you know, in effect.
Well, that's a good story.
You know, he set up a library, right, where scholars can come and lose.
This is one of the major thrusts of my book.
I mean, it's done on every level.
It is a genuinely philanthropic gesture.
It's not this potent library over here.
Sure.
Yeah, no, it's very interesting.
I mean, if I were you, I'd want to talk to him also.
My guess is he won't talk to you, but it's just a guess.
And again, I'm happy to ask him.
You know what I mean?
I'm not trying to... I'm going to write you and remind you.
Sure.
And maybe at some point after I've written a little bit, maybe I could send you a little copy to kind of show you where I'm coming from on the thing.
Well, this is not for me.
I mean, I will tell him that you'd like to talk to him.
I mean, I'm just guessing based on my acquaintance with him.
I love little coups like this.
You know, Dick Manning is kind of shedding his... He's been the big anonymous collector for the last couple of years.
He was the anonymous purchaser of Hope, and he was the anonymous purchaser of Shakespeare.
Yeah, he was supposed to come up, apparently.
We talked, yeah.
In fact, we were going to get together.
Yeah, it's too bad that it didn't come out.
We haven't met yet.
We've talked about six times.
He called me one night at 10 o'clock at home.
He said, it's good.
I like it.
I hope I'm not disturbing you.
I took a shot.
See if I can find your number.
I said, no.
I respect this.
This is the kind of thing that I do, tracking people down.
But he's going to be very good if I could.
I've got a terrific story here at Cambridge, I think.
What happens to Ricky Jay's collection?
My personal thought.
Yeah.
Well, I don't know.
I mean, you're a young guy, but let me phrase it another way.
How do you feel about collections going?
collected items going back out into the marketplace for the next generation of collectors, or should they go to an institution like them?
Well, again, I mean, here's obviously a difference.
I mean, as a private collector, I mean, I suppose I'd say it should go in the marketplace privately, but as someone who represents the institution, I mean, I think it's probably most likely it would join that collection.
You are in a unique situation where you
represent the collection, the formal collection, and your private collection.
Right, and we've worked out guidelines, the benefactor and I have worked out guidelines, so there's not a conflict with that.
And that's something that I think has to be discussed.
I think we've all heard stories of serious conflicts when things like that weren't dealt with.
Is the benefactor, does the benefactor consider himself a collector now?
Well, I think now he certainly does.
a major collection in this field, for sure.
Is it his collection, per se?
Well, it's fairly clear that he doesn't like to talk about it and doesn't choose to have anything mentioned with it, so I can't really go beyond that.
I mean, I can talk about the collection, and I have, on that level, fairly autonomous dealings with it.
I deal with the collection.
I don't have anything to do with the business of the collection at all.
So that's handled.
That's handled.
The business of the collection is handled by other people.
Like I said, I have nothing to do with the business of the... Do I sound like a naive questioner?
The point is you don't, yeah.
But you clearly are intrigued by all of this business and machinations.
And I'm not.
I'm intrigued by books.
And I mean, honestly, I'm really not.
I mean, and maybe it's my own fault.
You know, I mean, I don't know that I'm particularly sophisticated about business on any level.
I just... I love books, and I also believe in the worth of what we're doing.
I mean, you know, in establishing a research institution and hopefully going to the next step, which is having our own museum and with a small theater to keep these arts alive by the performance of the best people in the field and...
And this conference that we just put on, I'm incredibly excited about.
Did I send you the catalog of the conference?
No.
Would you do that?
Yeah, I actually have one in town here.
You need a lift someplace?
Yeah, you could drop me off at this house.
Okay.
Great.
So you can see, you know, on that level what we're doing.
I mean, you know.
Do you want to wrap it up now?
Whatever you want.
I'm fine for five.
Good.
I think there's anything else.
I mean, I think you'll probably find out there is later after you digest this.
I mean, we've been going around so much of a complete picture of it.
Have you heard, I understand that I've heard that... I mean, the choice I made about my book was not to try to do a chronological history.
Which I'm not doing either.
Right, which you're not doing either, right.
And now there probably is some variety there.
But rather, the things that interested me and telling stories that for the most part had not been told before.
And if you really want to get technical about it, you know, they were told only in the remarkable character literature.
I mean, that's another field that I passionately collect, you know, stories of remarkable characters.
And these compilations first begin in the end of the 18th century.
They were actually first done, you know, in Granger's History of England, you know, the whole term of Grangerizing, of illustrating these pieces, and the last class that he talked about where, you know, this wonderful class of entertainers and beggars and con ministers, and that's
That's the thing that I'm particularly fascinated by.
But I went back, you know, in many cases, to sources prior to that to try to find out the real stories.
And yeah, they are wonderful stories.
I mean, ultimately, I'm absolutely excited about this field.
I mean, I find the stuff wonderful.
And beyond the pure romance of a story like Hobson's, I find the insanity of stories.
Like one of the pieces I'm working on is a piece that I might call Houdini colon
Howdini, Audini, Martini, Zini, and Zucchini for tenders to the throat.
I'm compiling material on imitators of Houdini, and it's inspired largely by a poster I have framed in my house of a Hungarian escape artist named Martini Zini in a Mexican outfit strapped and chained to a cactus plant, printed by a German lithographer, you know, with the pastels of the plains and Indians behind.
I mean, I love this.
It's just crazy.
I love it.
This is
one of the best little stories you've published.
Yeah, but I mean, I do, and I mean... Who are you writing this for?
Is this a book or an article?
It may wind up being part of another book.
I mean, I just gave a paper on Aztec Lilliputians and the Wizard of the North, the last paper that I gave at my own conference.
There was a book published in 1850 about the travels of a man who found this supposedly the only heirs to an ancient Aztec race of sacrodotal intermarried priests.
who had sloped heads and were tiny.
And this becomes a great story.
So I bought, many years ago, I bought one of these pamphlets.
There have been a number printed since the first of 1850, which I have, and I have a few later editions.
And I found out, well, this may be an interesting story for your book.
By the way, it is.
Well, I'm saying how I wound up pursuing this and writing 50 pages about it, or whatever I've done, comes very specifically from
what I think is the best part of collecting.
So forget, years ago, I get this book, and I read it, and it's clearly a hoax, and wonderfully written, and charming.
But that's all I know about it at that point, that I'm very happy I've bought this pamphlet, but I don't really know much more about it.
And I'm also intrigued by the fact that you just sense from reading this thing that it's so preposterous that this can't be real.
I mean, it just doesn't sound real.
They're comparing
the Aztecs, the figures carved in Mayan statuary, and they're comparing it to the great Austin Laird's work on Nineveh, and, you know, Stevens' history of Central America has just come out, and these kind of fascinating sociological points to make the world ripe for this story.
And I'm very interested in the history of the presentation of freaks and anomalies of all kinds, and so I'm intrigued.
But that's 10 years ago, 15 years ago, whenever I bought this pamphlet.
It's at least 10 years ago.
Cut to, I'm in the home of a bookseller in Germany, and he shows me a collection of freak material.
Let's say this is between three and five years ago.
Remember, I'm terrible at chronology, but we have basic times.
And he shows me a collection of freak material that's very expensive, like $30,000 or something.
And in it, there are only two pieces that are vaguely interesting, but in fact, one of them is really interesting, and it's a piece of a man
holding two tiny people, and the caption is, the Aztec relocation.
I say to him, can I buy this?
And he says, you can only buy the whole collection.
And I say, will you copy it for me?
Make me a photocopy of this.
And I take another piece, too.
And that's funny, and extra, you know, as a collector, you don't want your exact passion.
So I have another piece, which I'm not particularly interested in, and I haven't copied that.
The reason I'm intrigued by this
is that I think the man holding the Aztec Lilliputians is the most famous 19th century British magician.
I'm looking at it, and it looks to me like it's John Henry Anderson.
But I don't know.
It's just so weird.
You know, I've never heard of any reference with John Henry Anderson in the Aztec Lilliputians.
I don't want to pay $30,000.
I mean, the rest of it is interesting, but not irrelevant.
Irrelevant, basically.
But it's interesting about how you work on a piece and how your collection becomes part of your life.
So I get a photocopy of this, and I take it home, and sure enough, I have pictures of Anderson, you know, these 18th century cabinets, and I take it, and it's Anderson.
It's absolutely Anderson.
So now I start hunting magic journals for some reference to Anderson and the Aztecs, and I find none.
I find absolutely no reference to Anderson and the Aztecs, and that's kind of frustrating.
So again, I think, all right, interesting.
Nothing goes by.
A year later, I come across some reference.
The first time I ever see Anderson's name linked with the Aztecs, and I think, boy, this is neat.
Again, nothing much happens, but it's all kind of coming together in my mind.
Years later, three or four years later, the dealer turns up in America.
Same guy.
And we've had some strained relationships since then.
And he's offering material for sale in this area.
And they're...
The thing that's interesting about this is he's offering it for sale at a convention of magicians, collectors of magic material.
And he's actually got that piece.
In parts, different pieces.
And he doesn't invite me to see this stuff right away like he usually does.
So I'm one of the last people to go up there to see his stock.
And there's this piece, the Aztec Lilliputian.
And now many magicians have looked at this and have no idea.
They haven't made the connection.
I mean, again, I'm not saying this to prove that I'm, you know, it's what happened.
And I see the piece, and I say to him, and the other piece that I'd asked him to Xerox is there.
The only two pieces that are Xeroxed, that I've Xeroxed, are the only, and I say, well, what happened here?
And he said, well, I was able to buy these two pieces.
And the piece, the price on this Aztec piece is very, very reasonable.
And obviously, if anybody had realized it was Anderson, it would have been much more.
So I get it like that, and then I work in earnest.
on this piece.
I mean, really nervous.
All these years have passed, he hasn't sold it.
He didn't own it.
He had to buy it.
It was on consignment.
And he wound up only buying those two pieces, clearly thinking he could then sell them to me.
But you did.
Okay.
Only one of the two.
The other one, I remember I was really never interested in the other piece.
Right.
Exactly.
It was a deep part piece.
I don't know if you want
I know that stuff makes good copy for a book.
It's just a little weird when you talk about how you buy.
Is there a payoff to the story?
Have you finally been able to fix Anderson?
The payoff to the story is I've located three other pieces with Anderson and the Aztecs.
I've now put the whole story together.
There's absolutely no question that he exhibited them.
I found material, and I've written, you know, a 40-page paper about, you know, Anderson and the Aztec.
I just gave it in this conference, and it'll be part of a book or published, you know, whatever.
I might want a little detail on it.
Sure.
So, I mean, again, it's a real collective.
You've just given me two stories that I'm not knowing what they were, but I came to get.
Well, I suppose what you're saying is you're interested in really anecdotal sort of stuff.
And the thing is that, you know, it's also part of why you rationalize.
Remember what I said earlier about how every collector rationalizes why he should have a piece in someone, you know, rather than the next person who also wants to buy the same piece.
And to me, this is what justifies my business in it, that I will go to these extremes in business.
That's a great story.
Just give me the years for Anderson again.
He was, I think, 19th century.
Yeah.
Just give me his full name, and I'll check him out.
Oh, I mean, it's just insane to me that I can't remember this off the top of my mind.
He was born in the first decade of the 19th century, and died, you know, in the 70s.
So he has some lost years, then.
Well, it's very interesting.
To this day, it's one of the points that I mention in this article.
There are a number of things that are very interesting about it.
One is that no magic report ever mentions this, ever.
It's like the last year.
He came to America.
He made two tours of America.
You'll see there's a lot of material in him.
Just look at the catalog.
His dates will be in the catalog yesterday.
It's very weird that I'm buying it.
No problem.
Because I even went to a great deal of trouble to find his actual birth date, which is recorded in at least four different places.
Okay.
Maybe that's why I'm reluctant to commit to it.
You always get the wrong date for him.
Just like Marcus had the wrong date for me.
I don't think he did yesterday.
But I found three other bills that have him with the Aztecs and every time he is unidentified.
I think it makes perfect sense that he was a promoter.
He was the most bombastic magician of his day, the biggest advertiser of his day.
For instance, you know, there are more pictures of him in that catalog than anyone else.
He was over in America two different times.
The first time he came here was exactly the same time that they were on tour.
They played the same venues, not at the same time.
They clearly met.
He brought them to England.
The thing that I do find fascinating is that he took them to see Queen Victoria, and yet...
he's not letting himself be identified with them on the program.
So there's a side of him that clearly is worried that this is beneath him as a performer, and yet here's a guy who will take publicity at any cost.
So it's not entirely solved, this mystery.
And then I go into the mystery of the Aztecs themselves and anthropological hoaxes, and I end the paper by tying it into Castaneda and the Don Juan books, because I think there really is a similarity, that there's
an absolutely fraudulent anthropological hoax going on.
So you're a scholar, and you consider yourself a scholar.
Well, I don't, I mean, I'm very, let's say I'm very serious about this work that I do.
I mean, but you mentioned that you no longer do nightclub shows.
Right.
I think this is clearly connected with the course that your career has taken.
You have elevated, you have elevated.
I don't know that it's elevated.
I've changed all my life.
I mean, there were 10 years where I refused to work on stage because I thought it created a barrier between a magician and an audience and I would only work in a close-up situation.
I would work in short-sleeved shirts and, you know, I mean, I've gone through many phases in my life.
I look at this as constantly evolving and at the moment I am passionately interested in
the history of my art and lecturing about the literature and the art, and, you know, I may be doing something very different.
I may want to be in nightclubs again in years.
And you're a young guy, 42, I guess, is the age.
One.
41.
So, I mean, you haven't even reached the halfway point of your career, not even.
We don't know that either.
Probably hope.
This could be the last day I ever do anything.
So where do we go?
It's clearly a development.
What excites me is that I'm doing different things all the time.
It excites me that at the age of 39 or 40 I suddenly was acting in some wonderful movies.
It excites me that
This year I've done my own television special, and it excites me that, you know, I had a book on this esoterica theme so well accepted.
That's a bestseller, isn't it?
Yeah, a mild bestseller.
Front page of New York Times, all of these things.
What were the numbers on that offhand?
I don't know.
I'm curious.
Well, there were three printings of the hardcover, although, I mean, that's the great crime of the book, is that there weren't enough hardcover copies out when it was really hot.
It was sold in three, four weeks.
It was on...
The front page of the New York Times with this rave two weeks before Christmas, and they didn't have another copy of the book until the first day of February.
You could have sold 100,000.
I was killed.
I mean, I was flat out destroyed.
It's a terrible story.
I've got the same house, too, and random house, which is the same.
They're good, I mean.
Well, you know, people, it's very interesting, booksellers always have said to me about that book, every year it happens to one or two books.
But there they went behind it and got back and did it.
The next year.
In my case.
They came right back the next year.
That's what they should have done with your book.
It didn't happen, and my relationship with Billard, with that branch of ranch, was just really strange.
That's part of what happened, is that he left in the middle of it.
He was a champion of the book, and he left, and my editor became the acting head, and it,
I'll tell you a cute Mark Jaffe story if you're right.
I'll shoot it up the machine.
By booksellers.
By books in general, beyond my field.
And I like the company of booksellers.
They're usually interesting people.
But it is a field that seems, you know, just utterly rampant with gossip.
I'm having no trouble getting this story.
That's why I really wonder if I have to go to court and get this.
Because I'm, as you can see, I'm getting what's available outside of the case.
I really am having a terrific, terrific story.
People are talking to me.
My sources are good.
Yeah, well, there are fascinating stories.
And I think the glass is as good as what's in the file.
Well, except that, I mean, I can tell you, you know, from my own thing, from the library, when we bought this library, all sorts of stories came out that were just ridiculous.
I mean, they were just wrong.
And people would call me,
And I would never tell anyone something that was untrue.
You know, I would tell them in my limited capacity what I could.
And people would simply ignore it.
It was the oddest thing.
I mean, I just think people's sense of God.
They'd make up prices.
They'd make up who this person was, you know.
I mean, you know, his profession, where he lived.
Never write for any of it.
Never, never.
I'll give you an example of the same thing.
Howard Gottlieb, you know, Howard, he runs Boston University's candidate in competition for Texas, but he doesn't have that money.
And I wrote a story on how—actually, this was the story that led to my selling book.
I should send you a copy of my shirt.
It was a nice little anecdotal story, but Howard said he was grueling, glorious once, and that's what I wanted a collection from Boston University.
He said, I was eating a macrobiotic food still was coming out of my ears, and he was sending him flowers.
And he said, and then I woke up one morning, and I heard on the radio, I heard on the radio,
that had gone to the University of Texas, and they did something that I couldn't do.
They gave her a million dollars.
And so I wrote that.
And then when I was kind of contacting the people of Texas, I sent them from the store.
And the last thing I was there for three days, two people told me, by the way,
That million dollars is bullshit.
You can only pay a hundred thousand dollars.
You tell Howard Brotley that we didn't pay.
We did not pay a million dollars for Gloria Swanson.
She wanted to come to Texas, and she didn't want to go to Boston.
And she really did not want to go to L.A.
And in those circumstances that she wanted to go to UCLA,
Because she thought she got screwed on the last one.
But she didn't, so she wanted to go outside.
I mean, now I can pretty much put this story down.
But how does it make you feel to have put in something that was a rumor?
I mean, do you feel good because it's a good story or bad that it isn't right?
Well, it wasn't in my book, number one.
But number two, the guy... Well, but it was in the article, I think.
Yeah, but I quoted the guy directly on the record.
Oh, that's interesting.
That's already very different than what I'm saying to you.
I read the quotes in them on the phone.
In fact, what it did do... What's strange to me is that I know anything about their worlds, you know, I mean, because that kind of collecting really is different.
I mean, there's this collecting that comes from passion and from the field, you know, and that's clearly what I do.
And once again, I'm not saying it's better.
Well, I guess I am saying it's better.
I guess in my heart I believe that, so there's no sense to mince words about that.
I think that is better than simply going out to buy the best book in the field and high spot without, you know, some depth or some intuition.
On the other hand, you know, people change.
We talked a minute ago about the evolutionary process, and if that's the way you get into the subject that you then become impassioned about and then become an expert about, great.
I mean, that's fine too.
I don't know that I even believe everybody's got to be an expert, but I think, I mean, it can't happen.
Did I mention I'm doing this guy, Forsheimer, down in Washington?
Do you know who he is?
Sure.
The CIA collection.
I think he's going to be one of my guys.
He is?
Yeah.
Fascinating.
His collection is unique.
And it's better than anything they've got at Langley.
Really?
Do you know who he is?
This is Forsheimer's nephew.
Oh, oh, oh.
This is not the great Forsheimer.
No, that's who I thought you were talking about.
This guy, he's alive.
was a charter member of the CIA.
He came out of the OSS, and then he has put together these people out of suite at the Watergate just to house his CIA collection.
Well, it's not just CIA, it's like what you've done with magic.
I mean, it's espionage going back 400 years, anything that... No, I don't know.
It's a great... But he's the nephew of... He's the nephew.
That's right.
He's the youngest member.
I left it at a 12-year club.
eccentric.
Should be just a thoroughly delightful.
Can I buy you a drink?
You were offered what?
Let's do it again.
Well, there's one particular day that I was offered a dean, whole art of ledger domain, not the first of 1722, but an 18th century dean.
I had no copies of that.
And that's, you know, a book that any magic person would consider a great high spot book.
You know, any book with Hocus Pocus in the title is considered really important, but I was also offered on the same day Pinchbeck's Expositor, which is the first original American magic book.
It's an 1805 imprint, 19th century, not 18th century, but it's a book that had never been reprinted.
um they were about the same price i mean to me there was no question about the choice but what were the prices oh god this is a while ago i i think i paid i think i wound up paying you know between four and five hundred dollars for the exposure you should have got a boat you know well i couldn't afford to i flat out couldn't afford to that was the whole point i mean that was an awful lot of money for me to be paying on a book but you couldn't take them both and pay the guy i mean we do that all the time well that's what i was saying i was already i was already in debt i was up to i mean no that was a great deal of money for me then i'm sure it was the first time i'd ever paid that much for a book and it
it just was a much more important book to read it wasn't a rehash it wasn't the same material it was a new approach it was a new country i mean uh another time i was offered a really important book at the same time i was offered uh the andrew roller book that i talked about in my lecture you know life travels and unparalleled sufferings of andrew i mean i'm trying to find books within this world that are also fun to read that are wonderful books to talk about i mean that give you great anecdotal material
you know, rather than simply some famous book or some book that's made important because someone else tells you it's important.
I mean, that's what comes from reading.
Well, let me ask you, so you clearly brought the book there that was the important one, did you?
To me, yeah, but I'm saying that I think other people making that choice would not necessarily have brought that book.
But would you also say that was a lost opportunity on the one you passed, or have you since been offered that book again?
Well, it's interesting.
I have, and I've bought a number of copies of it from the library, but ironically, I don't own an 18th century dean myself.
You know, even though the first Philadelphia dean, 1795, is a great rarity, and as I mentioned in that story, I really wanted that.
It was only by the weirdest stretch of luck that the third known copy of that didn't go to me.
I mean, it literally was the bookseller calling an R.J.
for information in Los Angeles and getting someone else's number.
That wasn't mine.
I'm an unlisted number.
and uh you know missing it out that way one other thing though uh you did mention your mentor how did you connect with him which which is that the 95 year old fellow oh vernon yeah well my grandfather um you know who mark mentioned this was a well-known amateur magician and and please i haven't asked you which your actual given surname is
I suppose I'm mildly pleased.
But anyway, my grandfather and this man, Vernon, were great friends.
And so I met him as a kid.
And then I moved to Los Angeles, really, because he was there.
So this was really a pilgrimage, so to speak.
Yeah, I mean, it was.
I came out to do some shows, and I realized he hadn't been situated in L.A., and I was going back and forth, and I just wanted to spend time with him.
So this really was a case of passing on, of taking an apprentice.
Yeah, in Los Angeles, Vernon and a man named Charlie Miller, who I just dedicated this conference to, who just died this year at the age of 70, who was brilliant.
And those were the two great sleight-of-hand men.
So you just didn't emerge into this world.
I mean, you were brought into it.
Can we say that?
Sure.
But, you know, my grandfather taught all the other grandchildren, too, and none of them ever pursued it.
You know what I mean?
Well, everything doesn't take, you know?
Right.
Everything doesn't take.
And for me, it did.
And, you know, you throw out the seeds and you hope one hits.
Well, that's good.
We're gonna run I think you get it